---
layout: chapter
section: cities
title: Readings on cities and disaster risk reduction
author: Scira Menoni and Funda Atun (POLIMI)
--- 
Atun, F., Kundak, S. (2013). Before And After HFA Retrospective View of Progress in Disaster Risk Reduction System in Turkey. Input Paper Prepared for the Global Assessment Report on Disaster Risk Reduction 2015. Retrieved from: [preventionweb.net](http://www.preventionweb.net/english/hyogo/gar/2015/en/bgdocs/inputs/Atun%20and%20Kundak,%202014.%20Before%20and%20After%20HFA%20%20Retrospective%20View%20of%20Progress%20in%20Disaster%20Risk%20Reduction%20System%20in%20Turkey.pdf)

Burton, I., Kates, R.W., White, G.F., (1993). The Environment as Hazard. New York and London: Guilford Press.

De Steffani, A. (2011). A la carte urban policies. Mega-events: from exceptionality to construction of ordinary planning practices. A look at Italy: case study of the 2006 Winter Olympic Games in Turin. Science Future of Lithuania, 3(3), 23–29.   ISSN 2029-2341 print, ISSN 2029-2252 online, doi:10.3846/mla.2011.047

Geddes, P. (1915). Cities in evolution: an introduction to the town planning movement and to the study of civics. William and Norgate Publisher.

Gehl, J. (1987). Life between buildings: Using Public Space. Washington, Covelo, London: Island Press. ISBN: 9781597268271.

Gehl J. (2010). Cities for People. Washington, Covelo, London: Island Press, ISBN: 9781597265737.

Gregory, F. (2012). Chapter 11 - The European Union and the promotion of major event security within the EU area. Routledge Online Studies on the Olympic and Paralympic Games.

HABITAT III New Urban Agenda, October 2016, Quito, Ecuador. Retrieved from: [habitat3.org](https://www2.habitat3.org/bitcache/97ced11dcecef85d41f74043195e5472836f6291?vid=588897&disposition=inline&op=view)

House of Commons Committee of Public Accounts (2007). The Ninth Report of Session 2006-2007. Preparations for the Olympic and Paralympic games – risk assessment and management.

Hewitt, K. (1997). Regions of Risk: A Geographical Introduction to Disasters. Essex: Longman.

Know4DRR, “Enabling knowledge for disaster risk reduction in integration to climate change adaptation”  Project, available at: [know4drr.polimi.it](www.know4drr.polimi.it) 

Linkov, I et al. (2013). Measurable resilience of actionable policy, ACS publications.

Lynch, K. (1960). The image of the city. The Technology Press and Harvard University Press, Cambridge.

Menoni, S., Molinari, D., Parker, D., Ballio, F., Tapsell, S. (2012). Assessing multifaceted vulnerability and resilience in order to design risk mitigation strategies. Natural Hazards, 64(3), 2057–2082.

Paris Agreement on Climate Change, October 2016, Paris, France. Retrieved from: [unfccc.int](http://unfccc.int/files/essential_background/convention/application/pdf/english_paris_agreement.pdf)

Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction, March 18, 2015, Sendai, Japan. Retrieved from: [preventionweb.net](http://www.preventionweb.net/files/43291_sendaiframeworkfordrren.pdf)

Sustainable development goals, September 2015 in New York, USA. Retrieved from: [sustainabledevelopment.un.org](https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/sdgs)

The prefecture of Milan, (2015). La prefettura al centro operative misto, 184 Giorni Viaggio dentro EXPO, a cura della Funzione Communicazione del COM, in Italian

TUIK (2011). Turkey’s statistical yearbook. Turkish Statistical Institute

Vale, L.J., Campanella, T.J. (2015). The Resilient City. How Modern Cities Recover from Disaster.  New York: Oxford University Press.

Wisner, B., Blaikie, P., Cannon, T., Davis, I. (1994). At Risk: Natural Hazards, people’s vulnerability and disasters. London: Routledge.

Wamsler, C., Brink, E., Rivera, C. (2013). Planning for Climate Change in Urban Areas: From Theory to Practice. Journal of Cleaner Production, 50 (July 1), 68–81.

World Disaster Report: Focus on culture and risk. (2014). IFRC. Retrieved from: [ifrc.org](http://www.ifrc.org/Global/Documents/Secretariat/201410/WDR%202014.pdf)