---
layout: chapter
section: response
title: Mapping the people and the organizations involved in DRR
author: Raffaele Giordano and Alessandro Pagano (CNR-IRSA)
---
## Introduction 

Enhancing the coordination effectiveness in case of emergency among the different responders, when a fast and efficient response is required, is the main scope of several studies aimed at overcoming the main organizational factors hindering the cooperation. Up to now, much more research has been carried out with respect to what happens within the same organisation under stress, while knowledge on what happens when multiple organisations need to coordinate in unison to make the best of their capacity in a highly stressful environment is still limited. Most of the efforts carried out for enhancing coordination effectiveness were meant to innovate the information technology for internal and external communication, information production and sharing. Empirical evidences demonstrate the need to shift from innovating information production and management technologies towards enhancing the interaction processes among the different actors in emergency management. Interaction represents the mechanism allowing the different actors to interpret their environment, to achieve a satisfactory shared understanding of the situation, and to cope with the organizational and individual improvisation needed to deal with extreme events. Moreover, interactions allow to mitigate the conflicting interpretation of information about emergency due to differences in knowledge belief, customs and assumptions. Therefore, a better understanding of the complex network of interactions activated during the different DRR phases is of utmost importance.

## Interaction network and DRR
Most of the efforts carried out in the field of organizational studies demonstrate that the network of interactions influencing the performance of a certain organization is more complex than the simple network involving the different agents. An organization can be modeled and characterized as a set of interlocked networks connecting four key entities operating within the organization, i.e. people, knowledge, resources and tasks. Therefore, in order to better comprehend this complex network of interaction, analytical methods are required capable to conceptualize not only the attributes of these entities, but also the set of relations and ties among them. The Meta-matrix conceptual framework could be implemented to this aim. This approach conceives the organization as composed by: social network, knowledge network, resources network, assignment network, information network, resources requirement and knowledge requirement.      

## How to map and analyse the map of interactions
The map and the analysis of the network requires collecting data about how the different agents interacts with each other, how they accessed the information and used it in order to perform some tasks. Two kinds of approaches can be implemented to this aim, i.e. the quantitative and the qualitative approach. The former requires numerical assessment about the different interaction. That is, how many times agent A interacts with agent B; how many times the information C is used by agent A, etc. Collecting this data is often difficult when the interaction is not leaving a tack – e.g. interaction via email, database access, etc. The qualitative approach is based on the elicitation and structuring of experts’ experiences and knowledge. It allows to overcome the limits due to the lack of data. The integration among social mapping and the critical event analysis facilitates the interaction with the experts and, thus, the knowledge elicitation phase.

	(Read more on: How to map the network of interactions)

	### How to map the network of interactions

Most of the methodologies aiming at mapping the network of interactions among people limit their analysis to the social network, that is, to map “who talks to, works with, and reports to whom”. According to the common formulation social network are developed in terms of ties among persons. The improvement of emergency management requires the adoption of an organizational perspective for what concerns the information sharing processes and the cooperative task allocation and performance. Specifically, temporary multi-organizations are created for improving the coordination efforts during the emergency management. This composite agent has to be considered as a network whose behaviour is a function of complex processes for combining and generating collective outcomes. In this perspective, networks are more ubiquitous than those simply social network, and entities besides agents can be networked together. 
The adopted methodology for mapping the interactions during an emergency is based on the conceptualization of an organization as a set of interlocked networks connecting entities such as people, knowledge resources, tasks and groups. This meta-network representation effectively combines the knowledge level perspective, the social network perspective and the coordination management perspective.   

The following table shows the meta-matrix approach.

|           | Agent                                                                                                       | Knowledge                                                                                                                                       | Tasks                                                                                                            |
|-----------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Agent     | Social network: map of the interactions among the different institutional actors in the different DRR phase | Knowledge network: identifies the relationships among actors and information (Who does manage which information? Who does own which expertise?) | Assignment network: defines the role played by each actor in the DRR phases                                      |
| Knowledge |                                                                                                             | Information network: map the connections among different pieces of knowledge                                                                    | Knowledge requirements network: identifies the information used, or needed, to perform a certain task in the DRR |
| Tasks     |                                                                                                             |                                                                                                                                                 | Dependencies network: identifies the work flow. (Which tasks are related to which)                               |

Table 1: Meta-matrix framework showing the connections among the key entities of social network (adapted from (Carley, 2005))

The details of the methodology for mapping the interaction among the main entities – i.e. agent, knowledge and tasks – is described in the following. 
The first entity to be analysed is the Agent x Agent matrix, at the basis of the social network. Table 2 shoes an example of the social network. 

